========
OVERVIEW
========

You know how you can call system tasks like $fscanf, $display, $readmemh, etc. 
from inside Verilog? Well it turns out you can write your own system tasks in C 
that do whatever you want.

To do this, you will use the Verilog Programming Interface (VPI). By writing 
certain functions with certain arguments, you can compile a shared object that 
any (compliant) Verilog simulator will know how to load at runtime.

The steps to using VPI are as follows; each one is explained in detail in a 
later section.

    In your C source code,
    
    1) Create a NULL-terminated array of function pointers that will be called 
       when the Verilog simulator loads your shared object. 
       
    2) In one (or more) of your startup routines, call vpi_register_systf for 
       each new system task you want to add. This function takes a struct as 
       its argument which includes (among other things) two callbacks:
       
        2a) A "compiletf" callback. When the Verilog file is initially parsed 
            by the Verilog simulator, this callback is triggered to let you 
            check arguments to your system tasks. This callback is optional and 
            can be omitted.
            
        2b) A "calltf" callback. Whereas the compiletf callback is a static 
            compiletime check, this callback actually implements the system 
            function (at runtime) that you are asking for in your Verilog code.
    
    And finally,
    
    3) Compile the C and Verilog and run the Verilog simulator with the correct
       arguments.

This document starts with a minimal working example that you should be able to 
start using right away. The rest of the document explains the steps in detail:

    - Registering your callbacks
    - The VPI API that your callbacks will use
    - How to write the callbacks themselves


REFERENCE MATERIAL
------------------

The VPI is defined by IEEE standard 1364-2005 (the IEEE Standard for Verilog) 
in sections 26 and 27, along with Annex G. This standard can be found at:

    https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=1620780

This document is actually quite easy to read; the only thing I'm trying to do 
here is distill it down to the minimum information you need to get started with 
VPI.

See also:

    https://iverilog.fandom.com/wiki/Using_VPI


=======================
MINIMAL WORKING EXAMPLE
=======================

This example has two source files (and a Makefile). my_task.c contains the code 
that will be called by the Verilog simulation, and hello.v is the Verilog file 
that calls it.

Please note: the provided Makefile uses Icarus Verilog. You can install it from 
the iverilog package. You can use XSim or Modelsim instead of Icarus, but 
you'll have to figure out how to write the Makefile to support them. 

Use "make run" to execute the Verilog simulation.

my_task.c
~~~~~~~~~

    #include  <vpi_user.h>

    static int my_compiletf(char*user_data) {
          return 0;
    }

    static int my_calltf(char* user_data) {
          vpi_printf("Hello, World!\n");
          return 0;
    }

    void my_task_register() {
        s_vpi_systf_data tf_data = {
            .type      = vpiSysTask,
            .tfname    = "$my_task",
            .calltf    = my_calltf,
            .compiletf = my_compiletf,
            .user_data = 0
        };
        
        vpi_register_systf(&tf_data);
    }

    void (*vlog_startup_routines[])() = {
        my_task_register,
        NULL
    };


hello.v
~~~~~~~

    module main;
    initial $my_task();
    endmodule


Makefile
~~~~~~~~

    all: hello.vvp my_task.vpi

    my_task.o: my_task.c
        gcc -c -fpic my_task.c -I/usr/include/iverilog 
        
    my_task.vpi: my_task.o
        gcc -shared -o my_task.vpi my_task.o -lvpi

    hello.vvp:	hello.v
        iverilog -o hello.vvp hello.v

    run: hello.vvp my_task.vpi
        vvp -M. -mmy_task hello.vvp
        
    clean:
        rm -rf *.o
        rm -rf *.vpi
        rm -rf *.vvp


==========================================
STARTUP ROUTINES AND REGISTERING CALLBACKS
==========================================

When the Verilog runtime loads your (compiled) C code, it will look for the 
vlog_startup_routines array. All the functions in this array will be executed 
one by one. Use these functions to register your callbacks.

To register a system task callback, fill an s_vpi_systf_data structure with 
information about your cutom task, and call vpi_register_systf from inside one 
of your startup routines.

The minimal example in the last section shows how to do this. More details are 
provided in the corresponding section of vpi_core_api.txt.


=======
VPI API
=======

Before we can write system task callbacks, we need to understand the API that 
VPI expects you to use. The full details are in vpi_core_api.txt, but I've 
provided an executive summary.

SUMMARY
-------

Given an object with vpiHandle old_handle, if you want to access an object that 
it points to, use

    new_handle = vpi_handle(type, old_handle)

type is one of the constants defined in vpi_user.h. Refer to Section 26.6 of 
the IEEE 1364-2005 Standard to find out what types you can use.

If the object has more than one pointer to an object of the desired type, use

    iterator_handle = vpi_iterate(type, old_handle);
    while (new_handle = vpi_scan(iterator_handle)) {
    
        //...
        
        if (quit before reading the whole list) {
            vpi_free_object(iterator_handle);
            break;
        }
    }

To access a compile-time parameter of an object, use

    int my_val = vpi_get(vpiInteger, old_handle);
    char *my_str = vpi_get(vpiName);
    //etc.

To access a run-time simulation value, use

    s_vpi_value my_val = {
        .format = vpiObjTypeVal
    };
    
    vpi_get_value(old_handle, &my_val);
    
    //Suppose the value was a vector:
    if (my_val.format == vpiVectorVal) {
        //Get the number of bits in the vector
        int size = vpi_get(vpiSize, old_handle); 
        
        //Number of elements in the array of int32s that represent the vector
        int arrlen = (size + 31)/32; 
        
        //The vector is an array of arr_len s_vpi_vecval structs 
        s_vpi_vecval *bitarr = my_val.value.vector;
        
        //Do something with bitarr...
    }
    
    //This specifically asks for an int
    s_vpi_value my_int_val = {
        .format = vpiIntVal
    };
    
    //This will cause the vector returned by the last call of vpi_get_value
    //to be deallocated!
    vpi_get_value(some_other_handle, &my_int_val);
    
    int x = my_int_val.value.integer;

Again, if you're looking for a reference of all the different types of objects 
and their properties, see Section 26.6 in the IEEE 1364-2005 standard. 


=============================
WRITING SYSTEM TASK CALLBACKS
=============================

The function signature for your callbacks is

    void my_callback(char *user_data)

The argument that gets passed in is whatever you put into the user_data field 
of the s_vpi_systf_data struct that was registered with the VPI core.

To get access to the arguments, use the following code. Again, the full details 
are in vpi_core_api.txt.

    void my_callback(char *user_data) {
        vpiHandle systf_call_object = vpi_handle(vpiSysTfCall, NULL);
        
        vpiHandle arg_list_iter = vpi_iterate(vpiArgument, systf_call_object);
        
        vpiHandle arg;
        
        while (arg = vpi_scan(arg_list_iter)) {
            //Do something with arg. For example,
            s_vpi_value arg_val = {
                .format = vpiObjTypeVal
            };
            
            vpi_get_value(arg, &arg_val);
            
            //etc.
            
            if (/*quitting loop early*/) {
                vpi_free_object(arg_list_iter);
            }
        }
        
        //At this point, both arg_list_iter and arg are no longer valid
    }

If you want to change a value in the simulation, you can use

        s_vpi_value new_arg_val;
        new_arg_val.format = vpiIntVal;
        new_arg_val.value.integer = 12;
        
        vpi_put_value(arg, &new_arg_val, NULL, vpiNoDelay);
    
This sets the value "right now" in the simulation. There are other flags you 
can use in the last argument to vpi_put_value, but I don't know how to use 
them.


======================
COMPILING VPI PROGRAMS
======================

This section is specific to Icarus Verilog. 

Basically, first we compile our C code into a shared library. To do this, we 
need to use -fpic for Position Independent Code, and we need to use the -I flag 
to tell the C compiler where vpi_user.h is located.

    $ gcc -c -fpic my_code.c -I/usr/include/iverilog
    $ gcc -o my_code.vpi -shared my_code.o -lvpi

Now, we ask Icarus Verilog to compile and run the Verilog with our VPI program. 
The -M and -m switches tell vvp (the program that runs compiled Verilog 
programs) where to find the shared library code and what it's called.

    $ iverilog -o my_module.vvp my_module.v
    $ vvp -M. -mmy_code my_module.vvp

That's it!
