========
OVERVIEW
========

I've been having trouble working with Galapagos, so I'm keeping this little 
file to remind me what's going on behind the scenes.

Here's a quick list of things that happen when you use Galapagos for FPGA 
projects:

    - (Only once) Set up some environment variables. 
    
      This is done using build.sh in the main Galapagos directory, and will 
      subsequently be replayed automatically from your .bashrc .
    
    - Generate Galapgos's custom IPs. The source is inside the middleware/hls 
      directory inside Galapagos's main directory. You must do this once for 
      each board you are targeting.
      
      This is done using "make hlsmiddleware" in the main Galapagos directory.
    
    - Write a "logical file" and a "mapping file". These are explained in the 
      relevant section of this document. Given these two files, the python 
      scripts inside the middleware directory will generate a directory inside 
      the "projects" directory inside the Galapagos main directory. This new 
      directory will contain a number of TCL scripts which will eventually 
      generate your bitstream(s). A top-level "createCluster.sh" script is 
      also generated which sets all the Vivado stuff into motion.
      
      This done (after writing your files) by additionally writing a small 
      Python script that makes a few function calls to Galapagos's Python 
      library. (Why can't this just be a single command?)
    
    - Call the createCluster.sh script from inside your project, and wait for 
      Vivado to do its thing.
    
    - At this point, there will be a bunch of bitstreams; program your FPGAs 
      and be done with it.

There is also quite a bit of support for running Galapagos kernels on a CPU 
machine, but I really don't know how to use it. I'll come back to it once I 
figure it out.

=================
FILE ORGANIZATION
=================

The main Galapagos directory contains several subdirectories. I don't really 
care about most of them; the most immediately important ones are "shells" and 
"middleware". Shells has one directory for each board Galapagos supports, each 
containing constraints files and some TCL scripts. Middleware contains all the 
custom IPs Galapagos uses and all the scripts that generate projects.

When you create a Galapagos project, the scripts will create a "projects" 
directory inside the main Galapagos directory, and it will put your stuff 
inside a new directory within "projects".

I really think this is a bad idea. Why not let the user use their own 
directories?


=====================
ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
=====================

Using the scripts requires you to set certain environment variables. There are 
some scripts to help you set these (see the next sectoin). To the best of my 
knowledge, here are the environment variables you have to manage:

GALAPAGOS_PATH:
    This is the (absolute) path to the Galapagos repository.
    
GALAPAGOS_VIVADO_PATH:
    The (absolute) path to the Vivado install folder. On my computer, this is
    /tools/Xilinx/Vivado/2018.3/

GALAPAGOS_HLS_PATH:
    The (absolute) path to the Vivado HLS install folder. On my computer, this 
    is also /tools/Xilinx/Vivado/2018.3/, but note that this is unusual. Most 
    other computers have this as a separate folder.
    
GALAPAGOS_VIVADO_VERSION:
    On my computer, this is 2018.3. 
    
GALAPAGOS_HLS_VERSION:
    Same thing, 2018.3 in my case.
    
GALAPAGOS_PART:
    This is the full FPGA part number you are using. For example, on the MPSoCs 
    this is xczu19eg-ffvc1760-2-i
    
GALAPAGOS_BOARD:
    (I don't know what this is yet. I'm pretty sure that this is the official 
    string that Vivado will understand, as opposed to the friendlier 
    GALAPAGOS_BOARD_NAME)
    
GALAPAGOS_BOARD_NAME:
    This is a name for one of Galpagos's supported boards. The choices are 
    "pynq-z2", "zedboard", "sidewinder", "adm-8k5", and "adm-8k5-debug".

GALAPAGOS_PART_FAMILY:
    (I don't know what this is yet. It ends up being one of "Kintex", "Virtex", 
    "7series", "Zynq", "Ultrascale_Plus", "Ultrascale", or 
    "Zynq_Ultrascale_Plus")

PROJECTNAME:
    The name of the Galapgos project you are working with

LOGICALFILE:
    The (absolute) path to your logical file (see "Logical and Mapping Files")

MAPPINGFILE:
    The (absolute) path to your mapping file (see "Logical and Mapping Files")


I really disagree with this method of shuffling strings around. It's fine to 
keep the path to Vivado and Vivado HLS in environment variables, but the user 
should just be able to leave the part numbers, logical file, and mapping files 
in their project. 


=======================
GALAPAGOS BUILD SCRIPTS
=======================

Galapagos comes with a bunch of scripts to help you set the aforementioned 
environment variables, as well as Makefiles for managing your projects. I 
haven't been able to use them succesfully so far. 

BUILD.SH
--------

In the root of the Galapagos directory there is a (very poorly named) build.sh 
script. It does not "build" anything; all it does is ask you a few questions in 
order to set the environment variables. Once you've completed the 
questionnaire, it will save all your answers in a small script in your home 
folder called ".galapagos", and add a line to your .bashrc file that calls this 
script. 

By the way, the ".galapagos" also adds some functions to your shell; this is 
explained immediately below.


/HOME/YOUR_USERNAME/.GALAPAGOS
------------------------------

This is the output of build.sh. It sets the Galapagos environment variables and 
adds two new functions inside your bash shell: 

galapagos-update-board:
    Call this with one argument, the name of the board you would now like to 
    use. The choices are "pynq-z2", "zedboard", "sidewinder", "adm-8k5", and 
    "adm-8k5-debug".

galapagos-update-versions:
    Call this with one argument, the version of Vivado you would now like to 
    use.

Galapagos adds a line to your .bashrc so that this script is automatically 
called.


SETUP.PY
--------

(Inside the main Galapgos folder) This is one of two scripts called by 
build.sh. This is the script that asks you all the questions with the nice 
menu.

Unfortunately, it has a few depencies you have to deal with. First of all, make 
sure you're using python3 (I've been using pyenv to manage versions, though I 
can't remember how I set it up in the first place). You also need a whole host 
of modules. Use

    $ pip install pyfiglet
    $ pip install regex
    $ pip install PyInquirer

and whatever you do FOR THE LOVE OF GOD DO *NOT* UPDATE PIP, for only Chaos and 
Madness await thee at its end.


INIT.SH
-------

(Inside the main Galapgos folder) This is the second of two scripts called by 
build.sh. Given the answers generated from setup.py, it will generate the 
Galapagos setup script that gets called from your .bashrc.

    Note: setup.py generates a script called "my_init.sh" which is just a 
    single call to init.sh. build.sh actually calls my_init.sh; it does not 
    call init.sh directly.


MAKEFILES
---------

The makefile in the main Galapagos directory has several targets you can use:

all:
    (Does all the following targets)

example_shell:
    I think this creates an... example shell? Honestly I have no idea

middleware:
    God what a mess! To use this target, you must set the PROJECTNAME, 
    LOGICALFILE, and MAPPINGFILE environment variables. This target is the one 
    which generates your project scripts, including createCluster.sh

hlsmiddleware:
    Given the GALAPAGOS_PART (and a few others) generates the custom IPs in 
    middleware/hls. You must call this every time you change the target FPGA. 
    (What are you supposed to do if your project uses more than one type of 
    FPGA? What a nightmare...).
    
    Don't forget to call galapagos-update-board first!

clean:
    Does what it says on the tin.


